Let's talk about talking to servers.
So everything that we're doing so far,
the calculator project is a really good
example, it all happens in the browser,
right?
It's not reaching out to any servers.
Once all the HTML, CSS, and JavaScript
is on your computer, it's just there.
So for something like a calculator,
you don't need to talk to a server, right?
You can do a math inside of a browser.
But let's say you have a social network.
Well you need the social part of it,
right?
Which means the data has to
leave the person's browser and
be stored somewhere, right?
So you have some sort of backend,
whether that's something that you wrote in
Node.js, or PHP, or something like that.
Whether that's just calling out to a CMS,
or some sort of managed service,
or you could do something like lambdas,
where it's all serverless.
Doesn't matter, stuff has to leave your
browser, and then it has to come back.
So we're gonna talk about that,
because it's a critical part
of doing frontend development.
99% of all apps have to talk
to a server at some point.
Not this one, right?
I guess my course website doesn't
really have to talk to a server.
There is no backend for
this particular project, right?
I guess the most backending thing is
that it has some analytics on it,
but that would be it, right?
So let's get into it.
The first thing we're
gonna talk about is JSON.
So we're not gonna be writing
any backends today, by the way.
If you wanna get into backend development,
lots of awesome courses
in Frontend Masters.
I think there's a whole
learning path on Node.js,
a great way to get started,
because you now know JavaScript.
You're just gonna apply JavaScript in
a different context, right, which is cool.
But we're just going to be
using other people's backends.
We're not actually going to
be writing our own backend.
And maybe for someone,
it might be helpful to clarify
backend versus frontend terminology.
The frontend is everything that
happens in a browser, right?
So everything that you and I have
been doing over the past couple days,
frontend coding, cuz it's code that we're
writing, HTML, CSS, and JavaScript.
And we're intending to send that code to
someone's computer while it will run on
their computer, right?
If I code my calculator, and
then you later load my calculator,
that code is being executed on your
computer, not my computer, right?
The backend does totally different.
This is going to be that I
wrote a bunch of code, and
then I put it on a server that
lives in Microsoft Azure, or
Amazon Web Services, or DigitalOcean,
or a computer in my basement.
I've literally done that before.
That code is executing on my computer, and
then it's sending new
information from my computer.
That is backend development, make sense?
Okay, so we're not gonna code backend
today, that's outside the scope of what
we're talking about, but we are going
to be using someone else's backend.
Okay, so imagine that you're
writing a bit of code,
And you load this webpage, you load this,
maybe it's a pet adoption app.
That's something that we code in
the React application for my React class.
Someone scrolls down to
the bottom of the page, and
you wanna get more dogs to show
them at the bottom, right?
The infinite scroll, I think we've
all used infinite scroll apps before.
It's not reloading the page, right?
So how do we get more
information into the browser?
We have to have some way to request data
from a server without refreshing the page.
Everything that we've done so far,
we will just refresh the page or
go to a different page.
You have to use a technique that's
called AJAX, right there, AJAX.
So AJAX is an acronym that
is not accurate [LAUGH].
It stands for
Asynchronous JavaScript and XML.
And this has nothing to
do with XML anymore.
It used to, right?
When this came out, it was absolutely
revolutionary that you could request data
from a server without refreshing a page.
Late 90s, maybe mid 90s, that was
revolutionary that that could happen.
And so they call that technique AJAX
because they were requesting, and
it was coming back in XML at the time,
right?
No one uses XML anymore.
If you have to use XML, my apologies,
[LAUGH] you have problems.
But now it's almost always
a different thing called JSON.
And AJAJ just doesn't have the same ring,
so we just keep calling it AJAX.
Now I'd probably just call it
fetch rather than AJAX, but
AJAX is the terminology
that you'll see everywhere.
All that means is that we're
requesting data from a server without
refreshing the page.
Before we get too much into AJAX,
I wanna get you familiar with JSON.
So your application,
your frontend application has to
speak the same language as
the backend server, right?
It'd be like if I picked
up the phone right now and
tried to call someone in Mandarin Chinese,
we have to agree upon
a language that we're not going
to communicate very well, right?
And if I don't speak Mandarin,
and they don't speak English,
nothing is going to happen.
It's the same thing with computers, and
it's totally the same idea if my
frontend calls your backend, and
they don't have the same sort of
protocol to speak with each other.
Nothing can happen because
my frontend will not
understand what the backend is saying,
or vice-versa.
There used to be several ways
of sending that information.
One of them was XML that was very
popular back in years and years ago.
But we've all kind of standardized
around this thing called JSON,
which stands for
JavaScript Object Notation.
Luckily for us,
we're coding JavaScript already, and
this will make JSON look very,
very familiar to you.
What does this look like right here?
It just looks like a JavaScript object,
right?
There's a reason why it's called
JavaScript Object Notation.
It's because that I can
literally copy this.
And I can say, luna =, and
I can just straight up paste this, right?
And now I have a luna
object here in JavaScript.
So this JSON is actually valid JavaScript,
which is kind of cool, right?
Now, someone might ask me the question,
is all JSON valid JavaScript?
Technically, you can have valid
JSON that is not valid JavaScript.
It's really hard to do.
So you can kind of operate on
the assumption almost all JSON is
valid JavaScript.
And this is not necessarily directly how
you and I would write JavaScript, right?
If I was gonna do this, Technically,
these quotes here are optional,
right, in JavaScript.
Right, so I have name and age here that
don't have the quotes around them,
whereas these ones do.
It doesn't matter, both of these
are totally valid in JavaScript.
In JSON, the quotes around the key and
the value are required,
so you actually have to have these
quotes on both sides, just so you know.
So not all JavaScript is valid.JSON.
I think that tracks, right?
Now, you're asking me why
are we talking about this?
This is a really useful way for servers
and frontends to send information back and
forth to each other, right?
So I can say, hey, give me luna, right?
And that server can then pull
this out of its database and
send it down to me, right?
Okay, so let's say we have some sort of,
Response from a service to pretend that
we made some call to a server, and
we got this response back from the server,
something like this, right?
Notice this is a string,
cuz it'll come back as a string, right?
Your server is not gonna be
able to send an object down,
because an object is a native
JavaScript datatype.
It's gonna send you a string, and
then it's up to you to parse
that string into an object.
So again, if I say
console.log(responseFromServer) here,
notice that this is a weird
looking string, and
it has all these escape backslashes,
right?
So there is a built in to
the JavaScript language called JSON,
all caps, you say JSON.parse, right?
Parse is just saying, I promise what
I'm giving you now is valid JSON,
you should turn this into an object,
right?
That's what that means there.
And then now,
if I say console.log(responseObject.name),
I'm actually able to get Luna out of it,
location.city, right?
I can actually pull things out of it as
if it was a normal JavaScript object,
because now this response object is
a normal valid JavaScript object.
Does that make sense, cool.
Yeah, we talked about escape
characters earlier in the course.
What happens if I wanna have a string of
one double quote, how would you do that?
If I wanna say let doubleQuote =,
how would I have one double quote?
If I put one quote here, Yeah,
so you have to escape it.
I have to put a backslash there.
And so now if I say doubleQuote,
this is actually just one double quote.
This backslash would not show up.
Now, an even easier way to do that,
by the way, would just be to use single
quotes and put one double quote in there,
same thing or backticks.
But this particular language that we're
using here just always uses double quotes,
so it has to always escape all of
its double quotes, that's why.
A valid thing to talk about as well
with JSON, it's always double quotes.
You cannot use single quotes in JSON or
backticks.
Always, always, always double quotes.
And notice that the 10 here is a number,
right?
So it doesn't have quotes around it
because you can have numbers in JSON.
So JSON can have strings, numbers,
objects, and arrays, and booleans.
I think that's it.
Right, you can have objects of objects,
the nesting there is infinite.
But at the end of the day you can only
have strings, numbers, Booleans, objects,
arrays.
Another thing that bears mentioning,
commas here are not optional, right?
So I have to have comma, comma, comma.
And if you remember in JavaScript
the final comma is optional,
in JSON it's not,
you must leave off the final comma, right?
So notice I don't have a comma here,
I don't have a comma here.
JSON will not allow you to do that.
They're all things you kinda just get
used to by doing it over and over again,
but I'm trying to think about how you
could run into trouble with this, okay?
So let's go in the opposite direction.
Let's say I have Luna here,
or my dog object, and
I want to encode this into JSON so
that I can send it to a server.
How would I do that?
Well, there's JSON.stringify, which is my
favorite name of a function in JavaScript.
All it does is it takes an object and
it turns it into a string of JSON, right?
So if I have const myObj
= , right?
So if I just log this out,
it's a object that has Brian on.
If I say my object.name,
if I say JSON.stringify and
I give it my object, I get this.
It's a string containing all of this,
right?
Makes sense?
Cuz you have to think
about how a server and
a client are gonna
communicate with each other.
They're just gonna send each
other strings of information.
And then it's up to either side
of it to turn that into data, or
understand that data.
So something that's useful sometimes is
notice here I just said stringify with no
additional options here, right?
And that worked.
It makes it as compact as possible,
so there's no extra whitespace in it.
Sometimes I actually do wanna
see the whitespace, right?
I'm actually trying to understand
what's going on in my code.
So if I do JSON.stringify(dog, null) or
you can put whatever you want here,
usually, I just put null,
it doesn't sound important.
And then if I put 4 here,
then you get this.
It indents your JSON with
extra optional whitespace,
and that makes it easier to read, right?
I can put 2 here, right?
And notice that it just
indents it with 2 now.
Or I can put 1,
which makes it really strange to read.
Or I can put 6, which makes it
super indented, whatever you want.
That's just how much you're
gonna indent the code with.
Just wanted to show that to you because,
Yeah, we're looking down here, right?
So notice, this is all very close here.
This is a little bit further,
further, further, right?
So notice it's getting more and
more indented as I go.
Cool.
So yeah, you might ask,
why is there a null there?
Back in the day,
they thought it'd be good ideas.
What happens if I need to modify something
as it's being translated into JSON?
They give you the ability to put
a function there that can modify things as
it goes.
Literally, no one uses it.
So I'm just telling you that for
your curiosity.
But this will always be null,
if you ever use it.
No one uses the replacer function.
I would venture to say that 95% of people
don't even know what the null is there,
they just always put it.
I just happened to look it up one time.
Okay, questions about JSON?
I know this was a little abstract.
We're about to start using JSON, but
it's important that you understand
how it works, essentially.